CERN Tape Archive Goes Into Operation

The output, or product, of CERN's experimental programme is its data: vast amounts of data are produced by the detectors
in the LHC experiments and elsewhere in CERN's experimental programme. This data is stored by the IT Storage Group
for reconstruction and analysis by physicists across the WLCG.

The custodial copy of all of CERN's physics data is stored on magnetic tape at Tier-0. Currently this amounts to around
340 PB. During LHC Run-1 and Run-2, the software system used to manage the tape storage was CASTOR, which was conceived
as a system to manage both disk and tape storage. Over the last ten years, needs evolved and a new disk system was
developed for disk storage and data analysis—EOS. This created a need for a new tape back-end to EOS. This project, the
CERN Tape Archive (CTA), was conceived as an evolution of the CASTOR tape system while removing the need to maintain a
second disk management system.

CTA has been in development for several years. In January, the CTA team started commissioning tests with the ATLAS
experiment. During the ATLAS Run-2 recall campaign in January and February, CTA was used side-by-side with the Tier-1
Storage Elements to provide ATLAS data for reprocessing. CTA had the lowest error rate of all sites and was demonstrated
to be performant and reliable for large volume transfers.

The disruption of Covid-19 and the move to teleworking caused a slight delay in the plan to bring CTA into production, as
both the CTA team and the ATLAS data management team adjusted to new ways of communicating and scheduling tests. There
was a determined spirit of cooperation which throughout the integration work and final commissioning tests, finally
allowing the migration of ATLAS's data to take place during the last two weeks in June. This involved moving the metadata
for 86 million files—the entirety of ATLAS's physics output—from CASTOR to CTA. (The physical data stored on tape is not
moved as this amounts to more than 80 PB, which would take many months to copy).

After the ATLAS data was migrated, CTA entered operation on 29 June 2020.

The other LHC experiments will migrate to CTA during the coming months, well in time for Run-3 data-taking. In parallel,
the CTA team will start to migrate the Small and Medium-Sized Experiments (AMS, Compass, Dune, NA61, NA62, nTOF, etc.)
CASTOR will be gradually decomissioned as each experiment is migrated, so that the CASTOR disk servers can be returned
to the experimental pledges.

Link to ITUM presentation: https://indico.cern.ch/event/914439/
